Roman Villa of Fuente Álamo

Very close to Puente Genil, three kilometres from its urban centre, is the site
of Fuente Álamo, the name of a place crossed by the stream of the same name
that, along with the ferocity of its lands, was the determining factor in man’s
decision to settle in this area two thousand years ago. A wise decision that as
time goes by will provide us with some of the best examples of the rural world
in Roman times.

Belonging, at that time, to the astiginian juridical convent, the Roman villa of
Fuente Álamo was located near the turning off the great road of antiquity, the
Via Augusta towards Antikaria, (Antequera), and equidistant from two important
cities in Betica, Ipagrum, the present Aguilar de la Frontera (Córdoba), and
Ostippo, Estepa (Seville).

The construction of the villa dates from the third century A.D. and seems to
follow the notes of the Latin writer Varrón: “when building the villa, care
should be taken to ensure that there is water within its enclosure or, if not,
that it is close by”. The different generations of owners followed one another
until the 6th century, although it was at the end of the 4th and during the 5th
century A.D. that Fuente Álamo reached its greatest splendour and luxury, with
mosaics considered unique in Hispania. It was precisely this generational shift
and the consequent change in religious beliefs that made possible the existence
of a room whose architectural layout makes it plausible to interpret it as a
place of worship for the Eastern god Mithra, the use of which could have been
Christianized at a later date. If this were the case, we would be looking at the
best preserved Mitreo in the whole of the Iberian Peninsula.

The architecture of the villa is defined by the presence of the stream on both
sides of which the building is distributed. Columela said that the capacity and
number of parts of the town should be proportionate to the total of its
enclosure and should be divided into three parts: urban, rustic and fruitful.
And so, occupying a large area on the north side of the town is the part
destined for storage, which in the case of Fuente Álamo was probably wine and
oil. It has an interesting network of barns or horrea raised above the storage
area and provided with ventilation ducts through which hot air circulates
creating a dry climate to prevent the wheat from fermenting.

On the other side of the stream, and connected to the northern part by a
thirty-eight metre gallery that runs over the stream, the southern part of the
village has a structure in an exceptional state of conservation. Most of this
construction is still buried under the surrounding land but it is highly
promising with walls up to two and a half meters high.